# ELAG 2017

http://elag2017.org Deadline extended till February 19.

<!-- TOC START min:1 max:3 link:true update:false -->
  - [Presentation Outline](#presentation-outline)
    - [Introduction](#introduction)
    - [Project Overview](#project-overview)
    - [Start demo](#start-demo)
    - [ETL Landscape tools](#etl-landscape-tools)
    - [Technology stack](#technology-stack)
    - [End Demo](#end-demo)
    - [End Presentation and wait for Questions](#end-presentation-and-wait-for-questions)
  - [(Accepted) Proposal](#accepted-proposal)

<!-- TOC END -->

DEMO repository: https://github.com/ATTX-project/elag2017-demo

## Presentation Outline

### Introduction
~2 minutes
introduce ourselves and where we work

### Project Overview
6 minutes

Talk about the ATTX project, its vision, base components and use cases:
1. Use Cases: 3 Use-cases TBD
2. Application
3. Infrastructure

Both Application and Infrastructure focus on "simple" installation, deployment and development and why not usage.

### Start demo
1 minute
start a small demo and let it run in the background (finger crossed)

### ETL Landscape tools
5 minutes

Present where such a Semantic Broker fits in this landscape and its advantages:
* provenance tracking - end to end provenance tracking
* advance capabilities of generating new data - Reasoning, Clustering, NER etc.
* flexible graph based internal data model

### Technology stack
7 minutes

Talk about the technology stack:
* Jenkins is an essential member of the platform
* Gradle the only way to automate everything including documentation generation
* cutting edge for the reason of experimenting and making them work
* Draw diagrams about them
* present the automation:
    - code Deployment
    - testing
    - releases
    - documentation generation

### End Demo
3 minutes

Conclusion you can start the Semantic Broker in a cloud like environment in your laptop, as you are listening in on presentation


### End Presentation and wait for Questions
6 minutes

"They say it could not be done, but we did it anyway, and it (kinda) worked" Joonas K. - Lunch discussions 2017

## (Accepted) Proposal

Title:
Putting Linked Data to Work; Semantic Data "Brokering" in Practice

Name of presenter(s):

Stefan Negru and João da Silva

About the presenter(s):
Stefan is a Linked Open Data Specialist at the University of Helsinki Library, he works with semantic web technologies, graph databases and but also data visualisation. He has experience both in an academic environment but also developing Linked Data applications in Healthcare industry.

Joao is a Network and Computing Infrastructure Specialist, focused on Automation of Cloud Computing solutions, through D Containerisation. His background is on the development and implementation of infrastructure projects. He's a proponent of open source, especially for cloud-based open data solutions.

Intended audience:
Data Wranglers, Open Data Producers and Consumers

Abstract:
The ATTX project started in September 2016 at the University of Helsinki Library, with the aim of providing easily deployable components for building custom linked data services on top of infrastructure-as-a-service platform, with an even bigger goal to achieving all of it this in about 1 year and 3 months.

During the presentation we intend to share our experience with the automation of technical (e.g. build and deployment of infrastructure) and administrative (e.g. data licenses, provenance and audit) aspects of linked open data management, in a project that aims to develop more than "just another" ETL platform for Linked Data.

We will describe the architecture of our proposed semantic data broker solution for Linked Data services, how it differs from existing solutions, and how it can be (re)used in an automated way by other projects and organisations, not exclusively in a library environment. We will focus on three points: easy development, easy deployment and simple publication of redistributed data with openly available and usable provenance.

Last but not least our talk will exemplify some of the use cases we have been tackling during the project.

For more details check the project website: https://www.helsinki.fi/en/projects/attx-2016
