attx_project/Feature-roadmap.md, before:

# Feature Roadmap

See also: [Release Plan](Release-Plan.md) for detailed planning of the issues.
### Q1 - mid April 2017
- Distributed deployment
- GC: Identifier based linking
- All: Service discovery (start)

Deliverables:
- [X] Decision on how to implement or plan the service discovery (select technology)
- [X] Implement the distributed docker environment
- [X] **Semantic Broker Release 1.0 for the public**
- [X] Use case 1 Infrastructures and Publications
- [X] Publish Wiki

### Q2 - July 2017
- All: Service discovery (finish)
- GC: Generating provenance data inside GC (i.e. moving WF-API functionality to UVProvenance-API for the Provenance Service)
- GC: Incremental harvesting of external data (e.g. OAI-PMH)
- GC: More complicated processing services (e.g. NER)
- DP: Easier Semantic Broker deployment (start)
- DP: Kontena Semantic Broker deployment

Deliverables:
- [X] ELAG 2017 presentation
- [X] Semantic Broker Microservice architecture v2.0 (start)

### Q3 - September 2017
- Refactoring of the architecture (v2)
- Messaging Service in use
- Basic Provenance service
- RML based transformation of external data
- Easier Semantic Broker deployment (Kontena, OpenStack templates)
- Kontena (cloud-service, deployment in cPouta)
- Sharing data between services (NFS, DigitalOcean's block storage)
- First results from the Metax Use case  
- OSFAIR2017 poster with Mildred project
- Article proposals for ISWC and IEEE Microservices journal

### Q4 - December 2017
- Indexing service with JSON-LD framing
- Incremental updates to the DC datasets (RDF Patch)
- Prototyping provenance browser
- Kontena as part of the CI/CD environment
- Service discovery/registry
- Demo instance running in cPouta

Deliverable:
- [X] SWIB 2017 presentation (coming)

#### Q1/2018
  - Data validation with SHACL
  - Platform support for ontology based inferencing

Commit message:

updated docs for Validation Service

attx_project/Feature-roadmap.md, after:

# Feature Roadmap

See also: [Release Plan](Release-Plan.md) for detailed planning of the issues.
### Q1 - mid April 2017
- Distributed deployment
- GC: Identifier based linking
- All: Service discovery (start)

Deliverables:
- [X] Decision on how to implement or plan the service discovery (select technology)
- [X] Implement the distributed docker environment
- [X] **Semantic Broker Release 1.0 for the public**
- [X] Use case 1 Infrastructures and Publications
- [X] Publish Wiki

### Q2 - July 2017
- All: Service discovery (finish)
- GC: Generating provenance data inside GC (i.e. moving WF-API functionality to UVProvenance-API for the Provenance Service)
- GC: Incremental harvesting of external data (e.g. OAI-PMH)
- GC: More complicated processing services (e.g. NER)
- DP: Easier Semantic Broker deployment (start)
- DP: Kontena Semantic Broker deployment

Deliverables:
- [X] ELAG 2017 presentation
- [X] Semantic Broker Microservice architecture v2.0 (start)

### Q3 - September 2017
- Refactoring of the architecture (v2)
- Messaging Service in use
- Basic Provenance service
- RML based transformation of external data
- Easier Semantic Broker deployment (Kontena, OpenStack templates)
- Kontena (cloud-service, deployment in cPouta)
- Sharing data between services (NFS, DigitalOcean's block storage)
- First results from the Metax Use case  
- OSFAIR2017 poster with Mildred project
- Article proposals for ISWC and IEEE Microservices journal

### Q4 - December 2017
- Indexing service with JSON-LD framing
- Incremental updates to the DC datasets (RDF Patch)
- Prototyping provenance browser
- Demo instance in Kontena
- Demo instance running in cPouta

Deliverable:
- [X] SWIB 2017 presentation (coming)

#### Q1/2018
  - Data validation with SHACL
  - Platform support for ontology based inferencing
  - Deploy to ATTX Semantic Broker instance for Helsinki University
