# ISWC 2017 Demo and Poster

https://iswc2017.semanticweb.org/calls/call-for-posters-and-demos/ Deadline July 27.

## Proposal 1

Title: Practical Data Provenance for Linked Data Brokers in a Microservices Architecture

### Abstract
We have been developing a data broker solution based on semantic web technologies that is flexible and extendible both in terms of incoming and outgoing data, as well as the cloud based infrastructural resources employed to operate the broker instance. Our solution consists of components implementing different types of services such as workflow and graph management, processing, distribution and provenance.

### Paper Contents

Maintaining some sort of data provenance, i.e. the data about the actions that have led the target data to its current state, is an integral feature of a system acting as a data broker. After all, brokering can be seen as an activity that transforms external data sources, which one might not have any control over, into new data source. This transformation can involve complex processing steps, which all contribute to the provenance data. Keeping track of who did what, why and when, is therefore necessary in order be able to ascribe responsibility of, e.g. data quality, to the right (human or software) entity.

We present the result of the ATTX project, which provides a set of software components that can be used to build scalable data brokers that work on linked data. We will cover issues and implementation related to modelling, acquisition, exposing and using provenance information produced by services that comprise the ATTX data broker instance.

The ATTX Workflow ontology has the purpose of describing how and when the data flows within the ATTX platform, types of activities or steps, associated workflows and workflow executions, the provenance information (agent and ETL processes performed) and other metadata.

Its main goal is to abstract the type of data utilised in the workflow and instead focus on the metadata that can be disseminated along with the workflow such as the steps (including the step types and configuration), the input and output datasets along with the activities performed to achieve the end result.


ATTX Workflow Ontology builds upon existing ontologies such as PROV-O and PWO, however due to its specific purpose it cannot make use of all the concepts and properties particular to these ontologies.

The ontology aims to provide a baseline required to capture and analyze data acquisition, enrichment and dissemination workflows. Thus, it covers the main aspects that correspond to prospective provenance [ZWF06] additionally, some essential elements of data services are also considered. A prospective provenance ontology "captures the procedure or "recipe" required to produce a data artifact." [ProvONE]

Extended and Similar Ontologies

The Publishing Workflow Ontology (PWO) has as a main goal describing the main stages in the workflow associated with the publication of a document.

Another related Workflow ontology is the OPMW-PROV Ontology that builds also on top of PROV-O, and at the same time The P-plan Ontology and The Open Provenance Model Ontology (OPMO). It focus is on workflow traces and their templates based, and similar to PWO, with a focus on scientific articles and their results.

ProvONE provides a more holistic overview on the Workflow and provenance infomation, yet still with a focus on Scientific Workflow Provenance.


connection with the logging ontology

## Proposal 2

Automatic Deployment of a Linked Data Broker in Distributed Environment

### Abstract

### Paper Contents

Advantages, integrated and uniform testing in all environments PC, Cloud, CI/CD testing environment

Having different components in containers; a problem with prebuilt software



References:
* [Applying the Virtual Data Provenance Model](https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/11890850_16)
* [The Publishing Workflow Ontology (PWO)](http://www.semantic-web-journal.net/content/publishing-workflow-ontology-pwo)
* [Automatic capture and reconstruction of computational provenance](http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/cpe.1247/full )
