Import/attx_project/Data-Model.md, before:

# ATTX Ontology

<!-- TOC START min:1 max:3 link:true update:true -->
  - [Ontology/Data Model - ATTXOnto](#ontologydata-model---attxonto)
  - [Related Data models](#related-data-models)
    - [ATT Data Model](#att-data-model)
  - [References](#references)

<!-- TOC END -->

## Ontology/Data Model - ATTXOnto

The ontology/data model has the purpose of describing how and when the data flows within the platform, types of transformations (and associated workflows), the provenance information (agent and associated processes performed) and other meta data.

[Namespaces references](Namespaces.md)

```{turtle}
@base <http://data.hulib.helsinki.fi/attx/> .
@prefix dc: <http://purl.org/dc/elements/1.1/> .
@prefix dcterms: <http://purl.org/dc/terms/> .
@prefix attx: <http://data.hulib.helsinki.fi/attx/> .
@prefix attxonto: <http://data.hulib.helsinki.fi/attx/onto#> .
@prefix prov: <http://www.w3.org/ns/prov#> .
@prefix pwo: <http://purl.org/spar/pwo/> .
@prefix rdf: <http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-ns#> .
@prefix rdfs: <http://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf-schema#> .
@prefix sd: <http://www.w3.org/ns/sparql-service-description#> .
@prefix xml: <http://www.w3.org/XML/1998/namespace> .
@prefix xsd: <http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema#> .
@prefix schema: <http://schema.org/> .
```

A general use case is represented in Figure 1 where we can depict several parts:
* ETL processes associated with the specific steps and workflows - see [ETL Workflow](ETL-Artifacts.md) for more details and [Workflow API](WF-API.md) which generates such specific information;
* Provenance Data Graph - which depicts provenance information specific to each workflow, data set etc.;
* Working Data Graph - contains both inferred and explicit relationships between domain data;
* Dissemination Data Graph - Data Graph distributed via the APIs.

![Figure 1. Ontology Use Cases Flow](https://rawgit.com/ATTX-project/ATTX-project.github.io/master/images/ontology_usecase.svg)

Figure 1. Ontology Use Cases Flow

## Related Data models

### ATT Data Model

* http://iow.csc.fi/model/att "Application Profile for Research Data Catalogues"

The Data Model is focused on data interoperability of catalogues and research materials find-ability (e.g. research papers and other types of documents). And as its label states it is a "Application Profile for Research Data Catalogues" or has the purpose to aid in building such an application profile.
The main focus seems to be however on the [DCTerms](http://dublincore.org/documents/dcmi-terms/#H2) vocabulary with concepts such as: `FileFormat`, `LinguisticSystem`, `LicenseDocument`, `Location`, `MediaType`, `PeriodOfTime`, `RightsStatement`.

The ATT Ontology also builds on the [PROV-O](https://www.w3.org/TR/prov-o/) with concepts such as Activity, Entity and [FOAF](http://xmlns.com/foaf/spec/) (Agent, Project, Document - interesting there is no use of PROV-O Agent - given that between them is the property `prov:wasAssociatedWith`, however considering the precise definition of a `foaf:Agent` rather than the broader `prov:Agent` it justifies the choice. At the same time the use of `schema:SoftwareApplication` could be introduced https://schema.org/SoftwareApplication) and SKOS: `Concept`, `ConceptScheme` and [DCAT](https://www.w3.org/TR/vocab-dcat/): `CatalogRecord`, `Catalog`, `Dataset`, `Distribution`. At the same time other utilised concepts are:
* Checksum from [SPDX specification](https://spdx.org/rdf/terms/);
* Object Characteristics from [PREMIS](http://id.loc.gov/ontologies/premis.html#ObjectCharasteristics);
* Identifier in [W3 ADMS](https://www.w3.org/TR/vocab-adms/);
* Variable in [DISCO](http://rdf-vocabulary.ddialliance.org/discovery.html#RepresentedVariable).

On another note the ATT Data Model intertwines Shape Constraints [SHACL](https://www.w3.org/ns/shacl#) with constructs such as:

```{turtle}
<http://iow.csc.fi/ns/att#DatasetChecksum>
        a                   sh:Shape ;
        rdfs:comment        "A value that allows the contents of a file to be authenticated. This class allows the results of a variety of checksum and cryptographic message digest algorithms to be represented."@en , "Arvo joka mahdollistaa jakelun sisällön tarkistamisen"@fi ;
        rdfs:isDefinedBy    <http://iow.csc.fi/ns/att> ;
        rdfs:label          "Checksum"@en , "Tarkistussumma"@fi ;
        dcterms:created     "2016-05-17T13:26:21"^^xsd:dateTime ;
        dcterms:identifier  "urn:uuid:7950884d-3a5e-4498-be71-1e82cbf6e1dc" ;
        dcterms:modified    "2016-10-24T12:02:53.317+03:00"^^xsd:dateTime ;
        owl:versionInfo     "Unstable" ;
        sh:property         <urn:uuid:9baa0ec8-f994-443d-9793-595ebe498e18> , <urn:uuid:0d4bcc55-523f-4d08-a37c-0fdb8923d630> ;
        sh:scopeClass       <http://spdx.org/rdf/terms#Checksum> .
```

## References

Reference ontologies:
* http://iow.csc.fi/model/att
* https://www.w3.org/TR/prov-o/
* https://www.w3.org/TR/vocab-org/
* https://www.w3.org/TR/void/
* http://www.opmw.org/model/OPMW/#
* http://www.sparontologies.net/ontologies/pwo/source.html
* http://vcvcomputing.com/provone/provone.html
* https://www.w3.org/ns/formats/ - Class URI for specific file formats
* http://purl.org/dc/terms/ - DC terms

Other models:
* https://www.usenix.org/conference/tapp13/technical-sessions/presentation/missier (D-PROV)
* http://wf4ever.github.io/ro/
* http://lov.okfn.org/dataset/lov/vocabs/kees
* http://lov.okfn.org/dataset/lov/vocabs/prvt
* http://www.sparontologies.net/ontologies/fabio/source.html
* http://www.ontologydesignpatterns.org/ont/dul/DUL.owl

Commit message:

updating contributions and ontology information

Import/attx_project/Data-Model.md, after:

# ATTX Ontology

<!-- TOC START min:1 max:3 link:true update:true -->
- [ATTX Ontology](#attx-ontology)
  - [Ontology/Data Model - ATTXOnto](#ontologydata-model---attxonto)
  - [Related Data models](#related-data-models)
    - [ATT Data Model](#att-data-model)
  - [References](#references)

<!-- TOC END -->

## Ontology/Data Model - ATTXOnto

The ontology/data model has the purpose of describing how and when the data flows within the platform, types of transformations (and associated workflows), the provenance information (agent and associated processes performed) and other meta data.

[Namespaces references](Namespaces.md)

**The full ontology description and examples are available at: https://attx-project.github.io/attx-onto/**

A general use case is represented in Figure 1 where we can depict several parts:
* ETL processes associated with the specific steps and workflows - see [ETL Workflow](ETL-Artifacts.md) for more details and [Workflow API](WF-API.md) which generates such specific information;
* Provenance Data Graph - which depicts provenance information specific to each workflow, data set etc.;
* Working Data Graph - contains both inferred and explicit relationships between domain data;
* Dissemination Data Graph - Data Graph distributed via the APIs.

![Figure 1. Ontology Use Cases Flow](https://rawgit.com/ATTX-project/ATTX-project.github.io/master/images/ontology_usecase.svg)

Figure 1. Ontology Use Cases Flow

## Related Data models

### ATT Data Model

* http://iow.csc.fi/model/att "Application Profile for Research Data Catalogues"

The Data Model is focused on data interoperability of catalogues and research materials find-ability (e.g. research papers and other types of documents). And as its label states it is a "Application Profile for Research Data Catalogues" or has the purpose to aid in building such an application profile.
The main focus seems to be however on the [DCTerms](http://dublincore.org/documents/dcmi-terms/#H2) vocabulary with concepts such as: `FileFormat`, `LinguisticSystem`, `LicenseDocument`, `Location`, `MediaType`, `PeriodOfTime`, `RightsStatement`.

The ATT Ontology also builds on the [PROV-O](https://www.w3.org/TR/prov-o/) with concepts such as Activity, Entity and [FOAF](http://xmlns.com/foaf/spec/) (Agent, Project, Document - interesting there is no use of PROV-O Agent - given that between them is the property `prov:wasAssociatedWith`, however considering the precise definition of a `foaf:Agent` rather than the broader `prov:Agent` it justifies the choice. At the same time the use of `schema:SoftwareApplication` could be introduced https://schema.org/SoftwareApplication) and SKOS: `Concept`, `ConceptScheme` and [DCAT](https://www.w3.org/TR/vocab-dcat/): `CatalogRecord`, `Catalog`, `Dataset`, `Distribution`. At the same time other utilised concepts are:
* Checksum from [SPDX specification](https://spdx.org/rdf/terms/);
* Object Characteristics from [PREMIS](http://id.loc.gov/ontologies/premis.html#ObjectCharasteristics);
* Identifier in [W3 ADMS](https://www.w3.org/TR/vocab-adms/);
* Variable in [DISCO](http://rdf-vocabulary.ddialliance.org/discovery.html#RepresentedVariable).

On another note the ATT Data Model intertwines Shape Constraints [SHACL](https://www.w3.org/ns/shacl#) with constructs such as:

```{turtle}
<http://iow.csc.fi/ns/att#DatasetChecksum>
        a                   sh:Shape ;
        rdfs:comment        "A value that allows the contents of a file to be authenticated. This class allows the results of a variety of checksum and cryptographic message digest algorithms to be represented."@en , "Arvo joka mahdollistaa jakelun sisällön tarkistamisen"@fi ;
        rdfs:isDefinedBy    <http://iow.csc.fi/ns/att> ;
        rdfs:label          "Checksum"@en , "Tarkistussumma"@fi ;
        dcterms:created     "2016-05-17T13:26:21"^^xsd:dateTime ;
        dcterms:identifier  "urn:uuid:7950884d-3a5e-4498-be71-1e82cbf6e1dc" ;
        dcterms:modified    "2016-10-24T12:02:53.317+03:00"^^xsd:dateTime ;
        owl:versionInfo     "Unstable" ;
        sh:property         <urn:uuid:9baa0ec8-f994-443d-9793-595ebe498e18> , <urn:uuid:0d4bcc55-523f-4d08-a37c-0fdb8923d630> ;
        sh:scopeClass       <http://spdx.org/rdf/terms#Checksum> .
```

## References

Reference ontologies:
* http://iow.csc.fi/model/att
* https://www.w3.org/TR/prov-o/
* https://www.w3.org/TR/vocab-org/
* https://www.w3.org/TR/void/
* http://www.opmw.org/model/OPMW/#
* http://www.sparontologies.net/ontologies/pwo/source.html
* http://vcvcomputing.com/provone/provone.html
* https://www.w3.org/ns/formats/ - Class URI for specific file formats
* http://purl.org/dc/terms/ - DC terms

Other models:
* https://www.usenix.org/conference/tapp13/technical-sessions/presentation/missier (D-PROV)
* http://wf4ever.github.io/ro/
* http://lov.okfn.org/dataset/lov/vocabs/kees
* http://lov.okfn.org/dataset/lov/vocabs/prvt
* http://www.sparontologies.net/ontologies/fabio/source.html
* http://www.ontologydesignpatterns.org/ont/dul/DUL.owl
